This is the source directory for version 2 of Crystal, an
MOS VLSI timing analysis program.  There are actually two
programs here, Crystal and Mkcp.  Crystal is the timing
analyzer, and Mkcp is a utility program to generate models
for Mkcp by running SPICE over simple circuits.  This directory
contains the following things:

- *.c, *.h: Sources for Crystal and Mkcp.

- Makefile: describes how to create runnable versions of
  Crystal and Mkcp.  To re-compile everything, type "rm *.o"
  followed by "make crystal mkcp".  Crystal and Mkcp should
  normally be installed in ~cad/bin, although this isn't
  necessary in order to run them.

- crystal.1 mkcp.1: these are Unix man pages:  terse but
  relatively complete descriptions of the two programs.  They
  should normally be installed in ~cad/man/man1.

- manual.tblms: a tutorial on using Crystal.  To print it, type
  "make manual".  Unfortunately, this probably won't work, because
  it depends on special Berkeley software for inserting pictures
  into the typeset output.  If you don't have Gremlin/Grn/Ditroff
  from us, run off the manual using "tbl manual.tblms | troff -ms".
  This won't look very pretty, but may produce something readable.
  The manual should usually be kept in ~cad/doc so users can get
  to it.

- pics:  this is a subdirectory containing Gremlin pictures for the
  tutorial.

- mkcplib:  this is a library of the cells we used to generate the
  default nMOS slope parameters.  It will give you some ideas about
  how to use Mkcp.  See the Makefile in this directory, which tells
  how to run Mkcp on these examples.

- other junk:  since this is a temporary advance distribution, it
  contains everything in my development directory, including a lot
  of stuff not mentioned above.  You can just ignore everything
  that doesn't appear useful, although you might find some of it
  helpful (like the RISC test critical paths in the eval directory).

If you want to make changes to the code, you'll be pretty much
on your own.  The best start is the paper that appeared in the
IEEE Transactions on Computer-Aided Design in July 1985.
There's no overall documentation for how the
program hooks together.  There are fairly descriptive headers
for each procedure, plus additional information at the front of
every source file.  Good luck!

Richard Kenner at NYU has made a number of modifications and enhancements
to Crystal.  Right now, they are separated from the "standard"
Crystal.  There are two files here related to Kenner's changes.
"Kenner1" contains a textual description of what he did, and the
file "kenner2" contains a shell script that will modify all the
Magic source files into his configuration.  I haven't done any
testing of his changes, so you'll be on your own with this (or you
can contact him for help).

					-John Ousterhout-
